Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to delete the
maximum element from a max heap
In the previous videos we discussed about heaps and how to
construct the heap from an array. That is we learnt
the heapify function
So the procedure to remove the max element in the
heap is first heapify the array that arranges all the
elements based on the max-heap property. That we have discussed
in the previous video. At the end of this process
the largest element will be present in the root
of the complete tree
In other words, it will be present in the array
index  0
Next we have to swap the first and last elements
of the array.
Now the largest element will be present at the end
of the array. Now we can remove the last element
by reducing the array size and after removal of this element
we have to check the max-heap property of index zero
and if it is not correctly satisfied, swap and continue
the heapify process. Here the heap property is
not satisfied.
So we have to heapify the tree
So this is how we can delete the maximum
element in a max heap
So the algorithm is heapify the array
swap the first and last elements, reduce
the array size by one. Check heap property from index zero
and arrange it accordingly
And then the deletion is done.
So now let us see how the code works
We have the function delete_max to delete the maximum
element
So as we said the first step is to swap
first and last elements.
So swap arr[0] and arr[size]
Now the maximum element is at the last position
Now let us print the maximum element that is
arr[size] and we will get max equal to 80
printed on the screen. Now set size equal to size-1
so that the last index is removed from the array
now the maximum element is deleted from the heap
Now we have to check if the heap property is
violated by this deletion. So pass the index 0 to
heapify function along with the array and its size
So in heapify, the index equal to zero
and size equal to 5 and it is not equal to six
as we decremented it earlier in the Deletemax
function. Now let us find the left and right children
of node at this index that is zero.
So left = 2*index+1
that is 2*0+1 which is equal to 1
and right = left+1 that is 2
And here we are assuming that this sub tree satisfies
the heap property
So keep max and index at the same position
And if any child is greater than parent we will
update Max
And finally if max and index are different we have to
perform swap operation
so first check if left child is greater than this
node
So we have if left less than or equal to size
and arr[left] greater than arr[max]
and we have one less than size
But 30 is not greater than 50
So this if fails here. now check if right child
is greater than max
So we have if right less than or equal to size
and arr[right] greater than arr[max]
and we have 2 less than size and 60 greater
than 50
So the right child 60 is greater than the current
max value which is 50
So update max and we got max equal to right
That is 2
And see now we have the maximum value of this
sub tree at Max. now check if max was updated
that is max was initially set to index. now check
If max and index are the same and max is equal to 2
and index equal to zero now. So it is
not the same
So if condition is true. So swap the elements at
Max and Index that is 60 and 50 are swapped
Now the maximum element is at the root position
Again we need to check for the max heap property of
the swapped index
So call heapify again by passing the array, max and
size
So here Index is equal to 2 and size equal to 5
Let us first find the left and right children of
node at this index.
So left = 2*index+1 that is 2*2+1 which is 5
and right = left+1 which is 6
and set max equal to index
Now let us find the maximum value in this sub tree
So check if left less than or equal to size
and arr[left] greater than arr[max] 50
left five is equal to size and arr[left]
40 is not greater than arr[max] 50
So this if fails here. Now check the right child
We have right 6 not less than or equal to size
So this if also fails. Now check
If max was updated and it was not. So no
need to rearrange and we can understand that now the
heap is perfect. So that is how we can
delete the maximum element of a heap. Now let us
delete the maximum element again from this resultant heap.
So as we said the first step is to swap
first and last elements. So swap arr[0] and arr[size]
that is 60 and 40.
Now the maximum element 60 is at the
Last position
So let us print the maximum element which is arr[size]
and we will get max equal to 60
printed on the screen. Now set size equal to size-1
to reduce the array size by one
so size equal to 4 now
Now the maximum element is deleted from the heap
Now we have to check if the heap property was
violated by this deletion. So pass index 0 to
heapify function along with the array and its size.
So in heapify, the index is equal to zero and
size is equal to four
Let us first find the left and right children of
the node at this index. So left equal to 2*index+1
that is 2*0+1
which is one and right equal to left+1
that is 2.
And as we said we are assuming that this sub tree
satisfies the heap property. So we will keep Max
and index at the same position
So now Max equal to zero. Now check if left
child is greater than this node So we have if
left less than or equal to size and
arr[left] greater than arr[max]. And we have
1 less than size. But 30 is not greater than 40
So if fails here and let us check if right
child is greater than max. So we have if right
less than or equal to size and arr[right] greater than
arr[max] and we have 2 less than size
and 50 greater than 40
So the right child 50 is greater than parent 40
So update max and we got max equal to right
That is 2.
And see, now we have the maximum value of this
sub tree at max
Now check if max was updated. That is
Max was initially set to index. Now check
If Max and Index are different and it is. so
if is true so swap elements at Max and Index
and the maximum element is now at the root position
Again we read to check for the max heap property of
the swapped Index. So call heapify again by passing
the array, max and size and here index equal to 2 and
size equal to 4. Let us
First find the left and right children of the node
at this index that is 2
So left = 2*index+1 that is 2*2+1
which is five and right equal to left+1
which will be six and set max equal
to index
That is 2. Now check if left and right child
is greater than this node. So we have if left
less than or equal to size
arr[left] greater than arr[max]
but left five is not less than or equal to size
So this if fails here. Now check
the right child. we have right 6 not less than
or equal to size
So again this if fails. Now check if max was
updated but it was not.
So there is no need to rearrange the nodes and we
can understand that the heap is now perfect
So this is how we should remove the maximum or
minimum element from the heap
So first we have to swap the first and last
elements
Then we can reduce the size of array by one
so that the maximum element is deleted
Then we have to heapify the tree
So that's all
And in the next video we will learn the applications
of binary heap